docs(release notes): DataHub Cloud v1.1.0 release notes (#17571)
datahub-project/datahub: docs/managed-datahub/release-notes/v_1_1_0.md

---
description: "DataHub Cloud v1.1.0 release notes covering OAuth2 dynamic client registration, the CDE Governance MCP toolset, DataHub Bridge Kafka worker, configurable assertion failure severity, and 10 new ingestion sources."
---

# v1.1.0

## Release Changelog

### v1.1.0

> Includes all upstream OSS changes through DataHub Core [v1.6.0](https://github.com/datahub-project/datahub/releases/tag/v1.6.0) — see [Updating DataHub](https://datahubproject.io/docs/how/updating-datahub/) for breaking changes.

Reviewer: This is technically not true, as the fork release branch was created 1 week before the OSS release branch so OSS 1.6.0 has some new commits that are not in this release.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, its sort of a weird gray area because our `defaultCliVersion` will be `v.1.6.0` which I assume is the dependency we take for stuff like ingestion. So I suppose its true that not all OSS contributions during that 1 week gap will be reflected, some of them (ex. maybe ingestion related stuff) will be in this release.

Reviewer 2: Also, shouldn't this be an internal link?

Reviewer: Converting to internal links breaks CI for some reason. Reverted back to external links.

#### Release Availability Date

25-May-2026

#### Recommended Versions

> - **CLI / SDK**: v1.5.0.19

Reviewer: v1.6.0 as per Ingestion team's request. I will update this along with helm and other things.

Reviewer: Fixed.

- **Remote Executor**: v1.1.0-cloud
- **On-Prem Versions**:
  - **Helm**: TBD
  - **API Gateway**: TBD
  - **Actions**: TBD

#### New Feature Highlights

> - **Configurable Assertion Failure Severity** — Severity levels on assertion failures with notification routing, so on-call engineers can triage critical vs. low-priority breaks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Assertion Failure Severity** — Assertion failures now include a `severity` classification that indicates how significant the failure is. Thresholds can be manually configured through [Severity Assignment Rules](/docs/managed-datahub/observe/assertions#assertion-failure-severity), or automatically determined by DataHub using signals like deviation from expected bounds, asset importance, and potential downstream impact. [SDK tutorial](/docs/api/tutorials/assertions#configure-failure-severity).
```

> - **Slack Assertion Notification Redesign** — Notifications now include downstream impact summary, embedded smart-assertion chart, severity, and threading.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Slack Assertion Notification Redesign** — Notifications now include downstream impact summary, assertion run result chart, severity, and noise-optimization with threading.
```

> - **Data Observability Agent — expanded** — Seed chats from the Quality tab; subscription management tools added; bulk smart assertion creation now flows through AI chat seeding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Data Observability Agent — expanded** — New capabilities; start chats from the Quality tab, manage subscriptions from the agent, bulk create smart assertions.
```

- **Deep-path SQL sources (Dremio and similar)** — table references with 5+ path components no longer drop middle components, so corrected URNs replace previously-truncated ones. Old URNs and any tags / owners / glossary terms / lineage attached to them are orphaned unless stateful ingestion with stale-entity removal is enabled.
- **Vertex AI** — model version set URNs now scoped per project.

**Ingestion — config & behavior changes** — likely action required for affected recipes

- **SQL profiling default → `sqlalchemy`** — recipes with `method: ge` need `pip install 'acryl-datahub[profiling-ge]'`. Applies to all SQL connectors including Unity Catalog.
- **Unity Catalog ownership / properties UPSERT by default** — manually-added owners or properties are overwritten on each run. Set `incremental_ownership: true` / `incremental_properties: true` to preserve them.
- **BigQuery `extract_policy_tags_from_catalog`** rewritten on `INFORMATION_SCHEMA` + batched Data Catalog API; old path removed with no fallback.

> - **dbt assertion result types** — runtime errors now map to `type = ERROR` instead of `FAILURE`; new `severity` field (`LOW` for `warn`, `HIGH` for `fail`). Alerts filtering on `type == FAILURE` will miss infra issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **dbt assertion result types** — runtime errors now map to `type = ERROR` instead of `FAILURE`; new `severity` field (`LOW` for `warn`, `HIGH` for `fail`). Alerts filtering on `type == FAILURE` will no longer include infra issues.
```

- **Slack Bot** — Responds to bot mentions; dynamic optional scopes for channel, group, and IM history.
- **Agents** — Run agent tasks as a specific user; `runAs` restricted to service accounts.
- **MCP Tools** — Read-only tools are now correctly annotated as such, letting agents skip approval prompts for safe operations. Entity description truncation is now configurable (default raised to 5000) so operators can balance context completeness against token usage.
- **Column-Level Metadata via MCP** — `get_entities` now returns aspects when called on a schemaField URN, and column-level structured properties and documentation are exposed (behind env vars), giving agents richer column context without dataset-level lookups.
- **Action Workflows** — Workflows can now be created without expiration date or additional notes fields.
- **Semantic Search** — Elasticsearch 8.18+ semantic search with Vertex AI and local Ollama embedding providers.
- **Structured Properties** — Stricter GMS validation; CSV enricher support; search enabled on single-select dropdown.

#### DataHub Observe

> - **Data Observability Agent** — Seed the chat directly from the Quality tab; subscription tools added to the agent; bulk smart assertions replaced with AI chat seeding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Data Observability Agent** — Start chatting directly from the Quality tab; subscription management tools added to the agent; bulk smart column assertions flow replaced with AI chat flow.
```

> - **Configurable Assertion Failure Severity** — Assign severity levels to assertion failures and route notifications accordingly, so on-call engineers can distinguish critical from low-priority breaks. Includes data model, GraphQL APIs, SDK, validator, and severity surfacing in Slack notifications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Assertion Failure Severity** — Assertion failures now include a `severity` classification that indicates how significant the failure is. Thresholds can be manually configured through [Severity Assignment Rules](/docs/managed-datahub/observe/assertions#assertion-failure-severity), or automatically determined by DataHub using signals like deviation from expected bounds, asset importance, and potential downstream impact. [SDK tutorial](/docs/api/tutorials/assertions#configure-failure-severity).
```

> - **Slack Assertion Notification Redesign** — Reworked notifications with downstream impact summary, embedded smart-assertion chart, severity, threading, recipient-ID analytics, and chart performance improvements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Slack Assertion Notification Redesign** — Notifications now include downstream impact summary, assertion run result chart, severity, and noise-optimization with threading.
```

- **Teams Notifications** — Redundant pass notifications suppressed; user resolution requirement added.
- **Assertion Errors in Alerts** — Assertion errors now flow through to the alert UI so on-call engineers see the underlying failure reason without drilling into the assertion.
- **Volume Assertions** — Decimal threshold values supported; `EQUAL_TO` operator added.
- **Smart Assertions** — Minimum lookback enforced in the tuning modal and executor; INFERRED smart assertions with non-uniform crons rejected; day-aligned backfill validation prevents midnight UTC boundary flips.

> - **Read-Only SQL in Assertions** — Set operations and subqueries now allowed in assertion SQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **SQL Assertions** — Set operations and subqueries now allowed in assertion SQL.
```

> - **Databricks Observe** — `TABLE_STATISTICS` support added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Databricks Improvements** — `TABLE_STATISTICS` metric source added. This runs [ANALYZE TABLE ... COMPUTE STATISTICS](https://docs.databricks.com/sql/language-manual/sql-ref-syntax-aux-analyze-table.html) followed by DESCRIBE TABLE EXTENDED, which reads the cached numRows from the catalog rather than scanning data. On Delta tables this is a metadata-only operation, making it significantly cheaper than a COUNT(*) query on large tables. [Read more](/docs/managed-datahub/observe/volume-assertions#3-volume-source).
```

> - **BigQuery Observe** — New `PLATFORM_API` source type for observe assertions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **BigQuery Improvements** — New `PLATFORM_API` metric source added. Uses the [tables.get](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/rest/v2/tables/get) API to retrieve the current row count for a Table. This is the most cost-effective option as it does not run any SQL queries or scan any data — the row count is retrieved via a free API call. [Read more](/docs/managed-datahub/observe/volume-assertions#3-volume-source).
```

- **DataHub Bridge** — New Kafka-based worker replacing SQSQ for moving metadata events from Remote Executor back to DataHub Cloud. Streamlines infrastructure dependencies (no AWS SQS / SNS required) and unifies MCL conversion across all workloads.
- **OAuth-Secured Kafka** — The executor now supports OAuth authentication when producing to Kafka, enabling integration with managed services (e.g., Confluent Cloud OAuth) and self-managed clusters using OIDC.
- **Faster, More Reliable Health Checks** — Health endpoint reduced to a sub-10ms liveness check. No longer fails during transient GMS outages, eliminating spurious pod restarts.
- **Proactive Background Task Monitoring** — Fetcher staleness, config resolver retries, scheduler jobs, and sweeper activity now emit Prometheus counters. Alerts fire within minutes of an issue, instead of waiting for retry exhaustion (up to 24h).

> **Operator note:** Use `WORKER_CONFIG_FETCHER_RETRIES` for alerting on sustained retries. The legacy `WORKER_CONFIG_FETCHER_ERRORS` gauge is preserved for backwards compatibility but no longer increments on every retry, so any existing alerts on it will silently miss issues.

#### Platform

> - **Zero-Downtime Upgrade (ZDU)** — Optional Elasticsearch side-upgrade path via Helm; overwrites during background sweep prevented; ZDU flags enabled in quickstart.

Reviewer: Not sure if we've called it out elsewhere, but we should call out that upgrading directly to v1.1.0 or beyond is not supported. Everyone must first update to v1.0.0 with ZDU preenable set to true.
cc: @chakru-r In case I missed anything.

Reviewer 2: Is this applicable to OSS as well?

Reviewer: Yes. It'll be applicable. 1.6.0 is the transition release for the same.
